#

_2020-04-04_

> "If you only have one; you have _none_"

I wish I had taken this data security proverb more seriously a few years ago when the hard drive containing the only copy of most of my personal files became unreadable.

Thankfully, it wasn't a huge loss. The disk didn't contain [bitcoins](https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/15/uk/bitcoin-trash-landfill-gbr-scli-intl/index.html) worth millions or the only copy of my (non-existant) litterary masterpiece. From what I can remember, it was mostly music, pictures and movies gleaned from the internet. One loss I did bemoan, however, was the totality of programs I had written as a teenager and in my early twenties.

I had a few phases back then were I worked on little coding experiments in Flash and later Processing. My main interest was "generative art". I would spend hours working on little demos in the spirit of what can be found today on sites like [openprocessing.org](https://openprocessing.org/browse/#). I'm not sure how many of these I had, probably no more than a hundred. I think most of them must have been trash, but I'm sure at least a handful were at least mildly interesting.

Last friday, I salvaged some dusty CDs from my childhood home on which I had made some backups of my Flash sketches back in 2005, when I was 17 😲. I wasn't sure if the data would still be readable, but lo and behold, I popped one of the discs into a USB DVD reader and all the files were right there!

Now as you may know, Adobe Flash, once the ubiquitous go-to for rich animations and interactivity on the web, is a totally obsolete technology nowadays. Persistent security flaws and the release of HTML5 and the \<canvas\> context sent Flash to the dustbin of history.
