# Returning to an Old Path

_2021-04-30_

I went through a drawn out phase in my twenties in which I was very depressed. It was an existential crisis in many ways. In an effort to heal, I got really into spiritual teachings of various stripes. I hoped I could find solace and perhaps some clearer insight into what the hell was/is going on. I was also really skeptical of organized religions and cults and so never engaged in anything formal for too long, never had a teacher, I just applied tried all kinds of different approaches, mostly meditation. I floundered.

Despite my best efforts, I never got anywhere substantial and none of the techniques I put into practice ever gave me any sense of making progress or achieving any sort of insight or peace or anything. Importantly, none of it ever helped me with my depression; if anything it made it worse.

At some point, following an acquaintance's glowing recommendation, I even went on a 10 day silent retreat at a meditation center where I diligently practiced from morning to evening with about 11 hours of formal sitting meditation every day. Even that intense experience failed to produce anything noteworthy for me. I was pretty dissillutioned with mediation at this point. That was about 8 years ago or more.

In the interim I have had a few other short periods where I did daily meditation; I guess despair drove me to it again and again despite the fact that it didn't seem to help. Despair, and a profound and seemingly unshakable fascination with the enlightenment discourse. The claims to insight made by so-called Buddhas, Zen masters, mystics of all stripes and the like seem so similar across time, space and socio-cultural contexts that I can't help concluding there must be _something_ there.

I don't know what that insight is, or what it might look or feel like. To be honest, I don't fully trust it's actually possible. But I've been fascinated with this stuff since childhood and I've felt for about just as long that there's just got to be something "more" to life. Something feels "off", "missing", or "not quite right" and when I read these sorts of texts with their promises of "Truth", "primordial awareness" or whatever, it resonates with me on a profound level.
Maybe it's a wild goose chase. Maybe there's just nothing to be gained but a bunch of wacky experiences. (There's a famous quote from the Buddha where he asserts to have truly gained nothing from enlightenment). Yet, my curiosity has kept me coming back. And every time it's been the same; I've banged my head against the wall to no avail at all; or so it's seemed to me. Eventually, I just gave up. I put all this stuff out of my mind and went on with my life. I thought I was done with this.

In come Daniel Ingram who I recently discovered in a podcast interview. Daniel is an American emergency room doctor who claims to have achieved spiritual enlightenment by following precise meditative practices based in the Theravada Buddhist tradition. He's written a book: _Mastering the Core Teachings of the Buddha: An Unusually Hardcore Dharma Book_ (MCTB) in which he lays out a pragmatic distillation of various Buddhist practices and roadmaps on the path to enlightenment. Against my better judgment, my interest was piqued. Daniel has a very down-to-earth, results-oriented approach which immediately appealed to me. It seemed this might be exactly the sort of book I wish I had had in those harrowing periods in my twenties.

I started reading MCTB (available free [here](https://www.mctb.org)) and it's been thoroughly engrossing so far. And with this newfound interest, I began meditating again...

Following some directions in MCTB I chose to begin with daily breath concentration meditation and this put me face to face with my old problem describe above. Namely, that meditation doesn't seem to "do" much of anything for me.

Putting this in perspective with my recent diagnosis of being on the autistic spectrum. I began to wonder if there might be something about my neurodivergent brain that could explain my difficulties.

For one thing, I'm an **extremely** intellectual person. I don't mean that in the sense that I'm a bookworm, or that I like to philosophize all the time. What I mean is that on very basic experiential level, I am nearly always "in my head". From what I understand, developing concentration and insight in meditation has a lot to do with connecting with bare sensory input; and this is something that just doesn't come naturally to me. I live and breath in a world of concepts and ideas; sensations are always distant and peripheral, almost alien. And don't get me started with emotions...

There's definitely a strong intellectual component to the world of meditation and Buddhism especially, in the form of seemingly innumerable frameworks, concepts and philosophical systems built to help navigate the spiritual realm. Setting that aside, pretty much all the practical advice I've ever seen seems to point back towards a focus on ordinary experiential reality, rather than cognitive understanding. Hence my difficulty.

It's not quite that I can't focus on sensations without intellectualizing them, it's just that I don't know what to do with these sensations, they just seem to happen, like raindrops on a windshield, but I fail to engage or feel any affinity or genuine interest. It's like "OK, but what now? Where's the puzzle for me to solve? What's there to understand here?"

In an attempt to get to the bottom of this I created an account on Daniel Ingram's [Dharma Overground](https://www.dharmaoverground.org/) forum two days ago. The platform seems to be populated by an earnest community of practitioners, mostly Buddhists, who share experiences, insights and advice. My first post was in the "Concentration" section, in which I asked the community if anyone there knew if being autistic could pose unusual barriers to concentration practice.

I outlined most of the above in my post and I received some generous responses rather quickly. Especially from one veteran member, Linda, who took the time to really engage with my quandary. She claimed to be autistic as well and that this condition, in her experience, may give one certain advantages when it comes to practice.

The crux of her advice seemed to be that it would be very helpful for me to find a type of meditation I could enjoy so that I could forget about outcomes and achievements and just do it. She suggested I should "fall in love" with my meditation object.

In this vein, Linda had all kinds of advice. For one she (and other respondents) suggested using a different meditation object as I didn't appear to "click" with the breath. Suggestions included using koans to engage the intellect, focusing on the fingers, doing mental visualization, or focusing on a visual object such as a flame.

Another important piece of advice was that I should try to relax into a meditative state, rather than attempt to bulldoze my way to enlightenment. At least that's how I understood it. Basically when beginning a session I should take some time to breath deeply, let sensations come and go, and generally try to broaden and soften my awareness of the sensual landscape and give my mind a rest. In a word, reconnect with my body. Once I've settled into that headspace, I should then try to find a pleasant sensation to "melt into" and use that as my mediation object.

I tried applying this technique and some of the other advice this morning and I can't say I was successful. Following another tip I read yesterday evening in MCTB, I began my practice with a spoken-out-loud statement of resolve for the session. I resolved to relax into bodily sensations, to try and just let them come and go without analysis, and then -- when I'm relaxed enough -- to engage in visualization practice.

I don't think I was able to really relax in any real sense. I was calm, but that's normal for me. I think. Regardless, I tried to relax as best I could and proceeded to experiment with visualization for a bit, but it felt directionless and I was unsure what to do, so I switched to looking for a pleasurable sensation that would be more engaging to me than the breath. I found that it was very difficult for me to actually find any pleasurable sensations. I felt pain, tension, various types of "cloudy" or "tingly" feelings all over my body, but nothing I could describe as pleasurable. Eventually, I settled into watching the sort of tense cloud space that seemed to persist behind my eyes. It was perhaps a bit more engaging than the breath, but maybe that's just because it was new. In the end, I wasn't able to reproduce the "melting/relaxing" stuff at all.

But Linda's advice also anticipated this, she mentioned the "aversion type" which describes a person unable to relax, or who actually gets more tense when they attempt to relax. Noting practice might be more constructive in such a case. I'll definitely come to noting (and insight meditation in general) in due course, but for now I want to explore concentration meditation a bit longer before I abandon that approach as it does seem like it has worked well for many practitioners as an entry point into more advanced techniques. (i.e. increasing concentration skills seems foundational)

Again, I don't know if it's a wiring thing or not, but I don't feel drawn to relaxation at all. In the end I'm not interested in meditating to become more relaxed or to have pleasurable experiences (although if that happens, I won't complain). But I am interested in gaining insight into the nature of reality. Experiential reality, at any rate.

I can't say I have strong faith in the process or a die-hard conviction about any of this stuff. I'm just really curious and hopeful; and sick of feeling dissatisfied, jaded, depressed, cynical, etc. So I'll give this stuff my best shot. I don't have much to lose anyway, and I have the luxury of free time so why not.
